Using node pull credentials during builds, image stream imports and pull-through (#136)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/node-artifacts/certificates-and-pull-secrets.md

---
title: node-artifacts-during-build-and-image-stream-import
authors:
  - "@rmarasch"
reviewers:
  - "@dmage"
  - "@bparees"
  - "@adambkaplan"
approvers:
  - "@dmage"
  - "@bparees"
  - "@adambkaplan"
creation-date: 2019-12-02
last-updated: 2019-12-03
status: provisional
---

# Using node certificates/pull secrets during build and image stream import

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

Allow OpenShift users to import and use images from any registry configured
during or after the cluster installation by sharing node's artifacts(certificates

> and pull secrets) with `openshift-api` and `builder` pods.

Reviewer: I don't think this proposal should worry about sharing the node's certificates.  We have sufficient mechanisms for providing CAs that all builds/imagestreams can trust at a global cluster level.

We're only missing the creds aspect.

Yes having builds+imagestreams use the node's CAs would remove one more possible delta between the experience of a pod pulling and image and an imagestream/build doing so, but i don't think it's a sufficient pain point to justify the additional complexity of adding yet another CA source to the transport CA loading hierarchy.

Author: That would hugely simplify things. What do you reckon @adambkaplan ? I remember this decision of incorporating CAs to this enhancements came out of one of our team planning sessions.

Reviewer 2: @bparees there are also client certificates (we don't support them yet), mirroring configuration (couple of different implementations). Can we add such things to a proposal as a vision how that can be implemented if we need them in the future? CAs is kind of a retrospective thing, we don't need to reimplement them if they are already implemented, but if we find another component that lack support of CA (unlikely), they can benefit from this approach as well.

Reviewer: @dmage this enhancement is specifically about ensuring that components that talk to registries (imagestreams, builds) have the same experience/behavior as nodes/pods do (meaning if a pod can pull the image, an imagestream+build can also access it).

Mirroring config we've already covered in imagestreams+builds, right (we use the same config as the node)?

Do we currently allow client certificates to be placed on nodes to perform image pulling?  Even if we do, i think i'd prefer to see that in a separate proposal or a future iteration on this proposal, i'd like to keep this particular item scoped to the smallest thing that's going to make our users lives much easier and i think that is just using the node creds for auth in imagestreams+builds.

And if you're just talking about allowing the use of client certs for auth independent of what nodes do, i think that's definitely a separate RFE+enhancement proposal.

Reviewer 2: @bparees I'm exactly about having the same experience/behavior as nodes/pods do. So far mirroring and CAs give slightly different experience for pods, openshift-apiserver, builds, and image-registry pull-through.

Mirroring config we've covered, but we also have a desire to use `containers/image` in openshift-apiserver and image-registry. This package needs configuration to be provided through `/etc/containers/...`. And I'd prefer to have this configuration from the node rather than implement another converter from k8s objects to a config file.

I'm not aware of client certificates in OCP 4.x, so it was just an example of the artifact that nodes can already use, but other implementations are not aware of.

Reviewer: honestly my preference would be to tie ourselves as little as possible to the node configuration and have k8s objects be the source of truth for both the nodes + other components.

but in the interest of expediency, and because nodes can have configuration that's not easily read from k8s objects (because the MCO allows users to inject arbitrary files on the node), mounting/consuming the node files is easier and i'm ok with that in some cases (such as here).  I don't think we should treat as the default/preferred approach though.

Author: We do have [this](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/115) other proposal on CAs that we need to keep sync with as we may have some overlapping areas with this one.

Author: After team discussions during Arch meeting I moved "certificates" out of this enhancement proposal's scope.

Reviewer 3: @ricardomaraschini please add the result of our discussions to the "Non-Goals" section of the proposal.

Author: @adambkaplan nice catch. I have explicitly added CAs and "mirroring config" to the non-goal section.

Author: We removed the certificates our of this proposal. Resolving this one.

users to import or to use during builds any registry data provided during or
after the installation, among the registries we would like to allow users to
interact with is `registry.redhat.io`. 

Nowadays credentials and additional certificates provided during cluster install
are available on node's filesystem. If user attempts to import an image stream
from these locations OpenShift fails as neither `openshift-api` nor `builder`
use the credentials provided during the installation. When users configure
additional certificates for their own registry these are also copied into node's
filesystem.

### Goals

- Allow users to import image streams from images hosted in any registry provided
  during or after cluster installation, including `registry.redhat.io`.
- Allow users to run `builds` based on images hosted in any registry provided
  during or after cluster installation without providing any extra credentials.

### Non-Goals

- Change the way users manage cluster certificates/pull secrets.

## Proposal

### User Stories

As an OpenShift user
I want to be able to import image streams from any image registry provided

> during or after the cluster installation

Reviewer: I would rephrase this as "i want to be able to import imagestreams from any image registry that the cluster nodes can pull images from"

Author: Good improvement, tks.

So that I can use them without manually creating any extra credentials

As an OpenShift user
I want to be able to use, during builds, images from any registry provided

> during or after the cluster installation

Reviewer: I would rephrase this as "i want to be able to use, during builds, images from any image registry that the cluster nodes can pull images from"

Author: Good improvement, tks.

```
volumeMounts:
- mountPath: /node/etc/docker/certs.d
  name: node-docker-certificates
- mountPath: /node/etc/pki/ca-trust/extracted/pem
  name: node-certificates
- mountPath: /node/var/lib/kubelet/config.json
  name: node-pullsecrets
volumes:
- hostPath:
    path: /etc/docker/certs.d
    type: Directory
  name: node-docker-certificates
- hostPath:
    path: /var/lib/kubelet/config.json
    type: File
  name: node-pullsecrets
- hostPath:
    path: /etc/pki/ca-trust/extracted/pem
    type: Directory
```

- Copy node's certificates to `anchor` destination inside `openshift-apiserver`
  pod before running the binary(`/etc/pki/ca-trust/source/anchors/`).
- Run `update-ca-trust` and just then start the binary.
- When user requires to import an image stream, `openshift-apiserver` would
  merge all pull secrets found in `/node/var/lib/kubelet/config.json` with
  other pull secrets that may exist on the namespace.
- Hook a `watcher` to observe certificates changes on node's mounted directories,
  running `update-ca-trust` when something changes.

#### Builds

- `controller-manager` would mount these three locations inside `build` pod 

>   as `hostPath`(similar to what is done for Image Stream Import).

Reviewer 3: Are we worried about this content missing on worker nodes? Do we need to mount these as optional? IIRC we have less control over what exists on a worker vs. the master nodes (where the control plane lives).

Reviewer: you're mounting a hostpath.  if the hostpath doesn't exist, i believe you'll just get empty content mounted into the pod.  I don't think there's any concept of mounting it as optional.

Author: There is no way of configuring `hostPath` as optional. If the file/directory does not exist on the node the pods won't come up:
```
MountVolume.SetUp failed for volume "invalid-path": hostPath type check failed: /invalid is not a directory
```
For sake of completeness: we may [ask](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L526-L558) to _create it if it does not exist_ but imo this does not apply to our problem as, among other reasons, it may bring headaches regarding permissions later down the line.

One option would be to mount a broader scope inside the pods, for instance the `/var` directory.

Reviewer: i think we should just determine if it's reasonable to assume the path always exists.  I suspect it is.

Reviewer 3: I would assume that any node which has a kubelet and is running cri-o would have the requisite directories. @umohnani8 and @mrunalp may be in a better position to confirm.

Author: This is already sorted out. Nodes running kubelet always have this requisite.

as the user may be able to shell into the pod and copy them. Another possible
risk is that the user may copy these secrets into a resulting image.

Mitigations:

As far as I verified(and this needs to be once more tested) it is impossible
to spawn a shell inside the builder pods. I also tried to copy the secrets from
builder's filesystem into a resulting image but it failed.

#### Multiple certificate sources overwrite or redundancy

As today we mount some certificates inside `openshift-apiserver` and `builder`
pods, this process needs to be reviewed as some parts may be redundant.

Mitigations:

Go through all mounted certificates on `openshift-apiserver` and `builder`
pods and make sure that we still need all of them as some of the certificates
may be already part of node's certificates now. Node's certificates will be the
starting point. Any other certificate may still be copied inside the pod but we
will have to change the process to use `update-ca-trust` binary to merge the
certificates instead of just copying them.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

- Attempt to import images streams from `registry.redhat.io` without provide

>   any other pull secret.

Reviewer: need to do this in a new/empty project.  (if you try it in the openshift project, it'll work today even without this enhancement because we put the pull-secret in that project).

Author: Yes, fixing it.

- Deploy an image registry using self-signed certificates and provide its pull
  secrets and certificates(`additionalTrustBundle`) during install. Attempt to
  build and import image streams from this registry.
- Deploy an image registry using self-signed certificates and provide its pull
  secrets and certificates after the install. Attempt to build and import image

>   streams from this registry. 

Reviewer: missing test coverage for "run builds using images that can only be pulled using node credentials".

Needs to cover:
1) pulling the base image
2) pulling images being used for content extraction/input
3) pushing images  (This one may need more discussion... i'm not sure if we want to allow regular users to leverage the node credentials for pushing images to registries..  that feels like a bit of an escalation from what users can currently accomplish by way of the node credentials today)

Reviewer 3: > pushing images (This one may need more discussion... i'm not sure if we want to allow regular users to leverage the node credentials for pushing images to registries.. that feels like a bit of an escalation from what users can currently accomplish by way of the node credentials today)

I agree pushing with the node credential presents a problem. I can foresee admins installing OpenShift with a pull secret that allows image push and not being aware that this pull secret could be used for push by _anyone_ via builds.

Author: I have been looking at the `builder` source code and we could use node credentials only during pull, never for push. If you are OK I would add another item under section "Risks and Mitigations" and a new test case for this scenario.

Reviewer: i think we've got consensus on that.

Reviewer 3: +1 to only using node creds for pull if pull secrets are otherwise not provided for the build.

Author: I have added a new item under _Risks and Mitigations_ to cover these aspects we have discussed on this thread. PTAL.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Tech Preview

Not applicable.

#### Generally Available

1. QE has test cases for all scenarios defined on Test Plan.
2. Regressions tests are passing.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Does not apply. This enhancement changes the certificate import process as well
as some inner workings for `builds` and `openshift-apiserver`. There is no
concern with Update/Downgrade strategies.

## Implementation History

2019-12-02: Initial draft
2019-12-03: Added node's docker certificates to the enhancement proposal.

## Infrastructure Needed

> 1. For testing purposes we gonna need an image registry running with self

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. For testing purposes we are going to need an image registry running with self
```
